# Reflections on Fed independence 

In his avowed disdain for Chairman Powell, Trump has broken with the norm whereby presidents respect the independence of the Federal Reserve. For the longest time US presidents have been putting pressure on the Federal Reserve to loosen up monetary policies and hence lower interest rates. Typically this pressure is often discrete, however President Trump has taken this to another level, it’s not just him that has been applying pressure on Chair Jerome Powell but also members of his administration; pressurizing the Fed on matters even beyond monetary policies. It is speculated that Trump will find a way or a reason to remove Powell from the Chair by the end of his term in 2026. Subsequently many anticipate that Powell will be replaced by someone who closely resembles Trump's beliefs.

## Fed and Political Pressure

Typically, when the Federal Reserve faces political pressure, it's often time to ease monetary policy, and when this occurs the central bank has two options: to give in or resist. In either case, inflation tends to rise. If the Fed gives in to the pressure, inflation increases more significantly. However, even if the Fed resists the pressure and maintains its stance, inflation expectations still rise—largely due to market expectations that the Fed will eventually loosen monetary policy. The key difference between political pressure on the Federal Reserve then versus now lies in the level of decorum and protocol traditionally observed. In the past when presidents wanted lower interest rates or eased monetary policies it was often handled behind closed doors. However under president Trump, the process has become a public spectacle, with the president frequently taking to Twitter to openly criticize and pressure the Fed.

## The importance of an independent Federal Reserve

Economists frequently support this idea of an independent Fed, due to the fact that it allows monetary policies to be controlled without any political interference. In contrast some may find it distasteful that there are many entities in a government that aren't democratically accountable. However if the Federal Reserve were controlled by an elected politician—whose decisions could be swayed by the upcoming election cycle and the need to appease voters—there would be a natural inclination to pursue expansionary monetary policies. These policies to juice up the economy through expanding the money supply and lowering interest rates, may be popular in the short run. However, such measures can lead to inflationary periods that are damaging in the long run. And therefore, an independent central bank is able to take a longer term view, being able to adequately address inflationary risks even though such measures may not be politically beneficial. Hence an autonomous Fed can properly control the adjustments of monetary policies in order to maintain sustained economic growth. 

Furthermore, considering the distinction between fiscal and monetary policy, having an independent central bank is very common, however having independent fiscal authorities is not. The usual justification behind this is that fiscal policy has a lot of distributional consequences, in the sense that it's important for it to be a political decision in which voters are able to decide which distribution they want. In contrast, monetary policy is thought of being more even, affecting the macro economy more than distribution, and that’s why it's important and more acceptable in a democracy for the central to be independent rather than controlled by a political party. 



**Taimur**
