# Option positioning on Treasuries 

In the option market, the skew has flattened — the demand for puts has risen relative to the demand for call options in the last week— due to bearish sentiment at the long end of the curve. In the bond market, the 30-year treasury yield has risen above 5% for the first time since early June, due to the fear of tariff fueled inflation and increased government spending from large economies around the world. Expectations of increased treasury issuance — to support a burgeoning fiscal deficit — have applied upward pressure on treasury yields, causing a compression  in net long positioning. 

# The Sell of in Long Term Bond Yields

The bond market's behavior reflects growing concerns about fiscal deficit and increased government spending, which could lead to higher issuance of long-term Treasury bonds to finance the deficit, and hence a higher yield on the 30 year Treasury bonds has been observed. This increase in the yield of long term treasury bonds has also been attributed to government spending increases in Japan and the U.S. The increase in Japan’s government spending has led to an increase in yield prices on longer dated Japanese government bonds, because fiscal stimulus, while potentially boosting economic activity, can also lead to inflationary pressures, making long term bonds riskier. Therefore, investors demand higher yields on longer term bonds as compensation for that increased risk. The same has been reflected in the long term treasury yields. In addition, the increase of yields on Japanese long term bonds has created pressure for U.S. bond yields to rise even more, to maintain demand for U.S. Treasuries and keep them competitive in the global market. The third factor driving higher yields on the long term treasury yields is expectations of tariff driven inflation. Combined with the increase in the U.S. fiscal stimulus, president Trump’s tariffs on imported goods has led to enlarged prices of consumer goods and has added to the noticeable uptick in U.S. inflation over the past three months. As of June 2025, the Consumer Price Index (CPI) rose by 0.3% from May, bringing the annual inflation rate to 2.7%, up from 2.4% in May and 2.3% in April. This, then, has caused the pick up in long term treasury yields as investors demand higher yields on long-term bonds. This is because inflation erodes the purchasing power of the fixed interest payments made by bonds. To compensate for this risk, investors require higher yields on bonds, especially longer term bonds, which are more exposed to inflation over time.

# Option Positioning on Treasuries 

In the option market the skew on 30-year U.S. Treasury bonds have sharply moved toward put options, as investors expect rising yields on these long term treasury bonds. Put options give investors the right to sell, hence when there is more demand on put options on treasuries investors are increasingly seeking protection against the possibility of higher yields and a potential selloff in long-dated debt. Expected increased yields on 30-year Treasury bonds indicate that the prices of currently issued bonds will fall, as the existing bonds’ yields remain lower than those anticipated for newly issued bonds. Henceforth investors demand higher premium for put options, reflecting growing concern for further increase in Treasury yields. This increase in demand for puts reflects a more bearish outlook for Treasuries, meaning that investors are betting that the bond prices are likely to fall due to a predicted increase in yields in the near future. This shift is part of the broader negative sentiment toward the U.S. Treasury bonds due to inflation concerns and fiscal policy. Moreover, there has been a decrease in net long positions in Treasury bonds. This further reflects the bearish outlook, as investors reduce their bullish positions in response to the anticipated risks of rising yields.

**Taimur**
